Add the news for v5.0.x branch. (#10084)
open-mpi/ompi: docs/news/news-v5.0.x.rst

Open MPI v5.0.x series
======================

This file contains all the NEWS updates for the Open MPI v5.0.x
series, in reverse chronological order.

Open MPI version 5.0.0rc4
-------------------------
:Date: 30 March 2022

.. caution:: MPIR API has been removed

   As was announced in summer 2017, Open MPI has removed support of
   MPIR-based tools beginning with the release of Open MPI v5.0.0.

   The new PRRTE based runtime environment supports PMIx-tools API
   instead of the legacy MPIR API for debugging parallel jobs.

   See https://github.com/openpmix/mpir-to-pmix-guide for more
   information.

> .. caution:: zlib is suggested for better user experience

Reviewer: I prefer the:
```
.. admonition:: zlib is suggested for better user experience
:class: note
```
As the presence of zlib is only a performance enhancement for scale systems (i.e. use note instead of caution).

Author: Done.

   PMIx will optionally use zlib to compress large data streams.
   This may result in faster startup times and
   smaller memory footprints (compared to not using compression).
   The Open MPI community recommends building zlib support with PMIx,
   regardless of whether you are using an externally-installed PMIx or
   the PMIx that is installed with Open MPI.

- Updated to use PMIx ``v4.2`` branch - current hash: ``1b86a35``.
- Updated to use PRRTE ``v2.1`` branch - current hash: ``91f791e``.

> - New MPI-4.0 features:

Reviewer: Before we release, we should have a disclaimer here stating that while Open MPI v5.0.0 is _NOT_ yet MPI-4.0 compliant, we do have a number of MPI-4.0 features implemented for developers to begin to use.

>   - Support for ``MPI Sesisons`` has been added.

Reviewer: We should also add a link to (https://github.com/open-mpi/ompi-tests-public/tree/master/sessions) where users can find our MPI Sessions test cases.

  - Added partitioned communication using persistent sends
    and persistent receives.
  - Added persistent collectives to the ``MPI_`` namespace
    (they were previously available via the ``MPIX_`` prefix).
  - Added ``MPI_Isendrecv()`` and its variants.
  - Added support for ``MPI_Comm_idup_with_info()``.
  - Added support for ``MPI_Info_get_string()``.
  - Added support for ``initial_error_handler`` and the ``ERRORS_ABORT`` infrastructure.
  - Added error handling for "unbound" errors to ``MPI_COMM_SELF``.
  - Made ``MPI_Comm_get_info()``, ``MPI_File_get_info()``, and
    ``MPI_Win_get_info()`` compliant to the standard.
  - Droped unknown/ignored info keys on communicators, files,
    and windows.

> .. note::

Reviewer: Use `.. caution::` here instead as this may break some peoples assumptions.

Open MPI v5.0.x series
======================

This file contains all the NEWS updates for the Open MPI v5.0.x
series, in reverse chronological order.

Open MPI version 5.0.0rc3
-------------------------
:Date: 08 March 2022

.. admonition:: MPIR API has been removed
   :class: warning

   As was announced in summer 2017, Open MPI has removed support of
   MPIR-based tools beginning with the release of Open MPI v5.0.0.

   The new PRRTE based runtime environment supports PMIx-tools API
   instead of the legacy MPIR API for debugging parallel jobs.

>    see https://github.com/openpmix/mpir-to-pmix-guide for more
>    information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   See https://github.com/openpmix/mpir-to-pmix-guide for more
   information.
```

.. admonition:: zlib is suggested for better user experience
   :class: note

>    PMIx will optionally use zlib to compress large data streams.
>    This may result in shorter-than-normal startup times and
>    smaller memory footprints.  It is recommended to install zlib
>    and zlib-devel for a better user experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   PMIx will optionally use zlib to compress large data streams.
   This may result in faster startup times and
   smaller memory footprints (compared to not using compression).  The Open MPI community recommends building zlib support with PMIx, regardless of whether you are using an externally-installed PMIx or the PMIx that is installed with Open MPI.
```

Re-wrap those lines as appropriate.

- ORTE, the underlying OMPI launcher has been removed, and replaced
  with PRTE.
- New MPI-4.0 features:

  - Added ``ERRORS_ABORT`` infrastructure.

>   - Added support for 'initial error handler'.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Added support for "initial error handler".
```

>   - Added error handling for 'unbound' errors to ``MPI_COMM_SELF``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Added error handling for "unbound" errors to ``MPI_COMM_SELF``.
```

>   - Persistent collectives have been moved to the MPI namespace
>     from MPIX.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Persistent collectives (they were previously available via the ``MPIX_`` prefix).
```

  - Made ``MPI_Comm_get_info()``, ``MPI_File_get_info()``, and
    ``MPI_Win_get_info()`` compliant to the standard.

>   - Added initial partitioned communication using persistent sends

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Added partitioned communication using persistent sends
```

    and persistent receives.
  - Added support for ``MPI_Info_get_string()``.
  - Droped unknown/ignored info keys on communicators, files,
    and windows.
  - Added ``MPI_Isendrecv()`` and its variants.

>   - Added Support for ``MPI_Comm_idup_with_info()``.

Reviewer 2: Add a blank line when outdenting.

>   - Added Support for ``MPI_Comm_idup_with_info()``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Added support for ``MPI_Comm_idup_with_info()``.
```

- Reworked how Open MPI integrates with 3rd party packages.

>   The decision was made to stop building 3rd-party packages
>   such as Libevent, HWLOC, PMIx, and PRRTE as MCA components
>   and instead 1) start relying on external libraries whenever
>   possible and 2) Open MPI builds the 3rd party libraries (if needed)
>   as independent libraries, rather than linked into libopen-pal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

  .. note:: Open MPI no longer builds 3rd-party packages
      such as Libevent, HWLOC, PMIx, and PRRTE as MCA components
      and instead:
      
        #. Relies on external libraries whenever possible, and
        #. Builds the 3rd party libraries only if needed, and as independent libraries, rather than linked into the Open MPI core libraries.
```

Re-wrap and indent as appropriate -- it's hard to tell the correct indenting level here in a review comment.

> - Updated to use PMIx v4.2 branch - current hash: b59e49f
> - Updated to use PRRTE v2.1 branch - current hash: 8c09625

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Updated to use PMIx ``v4.2`` branch
- Updated to use PRRTE ``v2.1`` branch
```

> - osc/rdma and various btls: Many fixes to better support btl/tcp.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Many MPI one-sided and RDMA emulation fixes for the TCP BTL.
```

>   - This patch series fixs many issues when running with
>     ``--mca osc rdma --mca btl tcp``, IE - TCP support for one sided
>     MPI calls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- Change the default component build behavior to prefer building

>   components as part of libmpi.so instead of individual DSOs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  components as part of the core Open MPI library instead of individual DSOs.
```

- Remove pml/yalla, mxm, mtl/psm, and ikrit components.
- Remove all vestiges of the C/R support.
- Various ROMIO v3.4.1 updates.

> - Use Pandoc to generate manpages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- 32 bit atomics are now only supported via C11 compliant compilers.
- Explicitly disable support for GNU gcc < v4.8.1 (note: the default
  gcc compiler that is included in RHEL 7 is v4.8.5).

> - HWLOC: Require v1.11.0 or later.
> - HWLOC: Updated internal hwloc to v2.7.0.
> - HWLOC: enable --enable-plugins when appropriate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Hwloc updates

    - Require v1.11.0 or later.
    - Updated internal Hwloc to v2.7.0.
    - Use ``--enable-plugins`` when appropriate.
    
```

  When running configure on the internal hwloc, enable plugins via
  the --enable-plugins option when 1) --disable-dlopen was not
  specified and 2) the user didn't add some variant of
  --enable-plugins on the configure line already.  The motivation
  for this change is to not pull in hwloc dependencies like libcuda

>   in the general case.

Reviewer 2: This comment / explanation should be in the documentation somewhere, not the news.

> - Do not build Open SHMEM layer when there are no SPMLs available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Do not build the Open SHMEM layer when there are no SPMLs available.
```

  Currently, this means the Open SHMEM layer will only build if
  the UCX library is found.
- Fix rank-by algorithms to properly rank by object and span.
- Updated the ``-mca pml`` option to only accept one pml, not a list.
- vprotocol/pessimist: Updated to support ``MPI_THREAD_MULLTIPLE``.

> - btl/tcp: Updated to use reachability and graph solving for global
>   interface matching. This has been shown to improve ``MPI_Init()``
>   performance under btl/tcp.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Updated the TCP BTL to use graph solving for global
  interface matching between peers in order to improve ``MPI_Init()`` wireup
  performance.
```

> - fs/ime: Fixed compilation errors due to missing header inclusion

Reviewer 2: What is fs/ime?  Put in more neutral language here, describing whatever the thing was that was fixed.

  Thanks to Sylvain Didelot <sdidelot@ddn.com> for finding
  and fixing this issue.

> - Fixed bug where MPI_Init_thread can give wrong error messages by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fixed bug where ``MPI_Init_thread()`` can give wrong error messages by
```

  delaying error reporting until all infrastructure is running.
- Atomics support removed: S390/s390x, Sparc v9, ARMv4 and ARMv5 CMA
  support.
- ``autogen.pl`` now supports a ``-j`` option to run multi-threaded.
  Users can also use environment variable ``AUTOMAKE_JOBS``.

> - PMI support has been removed for Open MPI apps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- PMI support has been removed from Open MPI; only PMIx is now supported.
```

> - Legacy btl/sm has been removed, and replaced with btl/vader, which
>   was renamed to btl/sm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The legacy ``sm`` (shared memory) BTL has been removed.  The next-generation shared memory BTL ``vader`` replaces it, and has been renamed to be ``sm`` (although using the name ``vader`` will still work).
```

> - Update btl/sm to not use CMA in user namespaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Update the (new) ``sm`` shared memory BTL to not use Linux Cross Memory Attach (CMA) in user namespaces.
```

> - C++ bindings have been removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The MPI C++ bindings have been removed.
```

> - The ``--am`` and ``--amca`` options have been deprecated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The ``--am`` and ``--amca`` command line options to ``mpirun`` have been deprecated.
```

> - opal/mca/threads framework added. Currently supports
>   argobots, qthreads, and pthreads. See the --with-threads=x option
>   in configure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Add support for qthreads and Arbots userspace threads.
```

Author: This seems less descriptive/helpful

- Various ``README.md`` fixes - thanks to:
  Yixin Zhang <zhany217@wfu.edu>,
  Samuel Cho <choss@wfu.edu>,
  Robert Langfield <langrc18@wfu.edu>,
  Alex Ross <rossaj16@wfu.edu>,
  Sophia Fang <fangq18@wfu.edu>,
  mitchelltopaloglu <mitchelltopaloglu@gmail.com>,
  Evstrife <wus217@wfu.edu>, and
  Hao Tong <tongh18@gemini.deac.wfu.edu> for their
  contributions.
- osc/pt2pt: Removed. Users can use osc/rdma + btl/tcp
  for OSC support using TCP, or other providers.
- Open MPI now links -levent_core instead of -levent.
- common/cuda docs: Various fixes. Thanks to
  Simon Byrne <simonbyrne@gmail.com> for finding and fixing.
- osc/ucx: Add support for acc_single_intrinsic.
- Fixed ``buildrpm.sh -r`` option used for RPM options specification.
  Thanks to John K. McIver III <john.mciver.iii@gmail.com> for
  reporting and fixing.

> - configure: Added support for setting the wrapper C compiler.
>   Adds new option ``--with-wrapper-cc=``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added support for setting the wrapper C compiler via a new ``configure`` CLI option: ``--with-wrapper-cc=``.
```

- mpi_f08: Fixed Fortran-8-byte-INTEGER vs. C-4-byte-int issue.
  Thanks to @ahaichen for reporting the bug.
- opal/thread/tsd: Added thread-specific-data (tsd) api.
- Add missing ``MPI_Status`` conversion subroutines:
  ``MPI_Status_c2f08()``, ``MPI_Status_f082c()``, ``MPI_Status_f082f()``,
  ``MPI_Status_f2f08()`` and the ``PMPI_*`` related subroutines.

> - patcher: Removed the Linux component.

Author: Is removing entire components not news-worthy?

> - patcher: Removed the Linux component.

Reviewer 2: Is removing the `patcher` Linux component something a user would notice?  I assumed no, but could be convinced otherwise.

> - opal/util: Fixed typo in error string. Thanks to
>   NARIBAYASHI Akira <a.naribayashi@fujitsu.com> for finding
>   and fixing the bug.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Thanks to
  NARIBAYASHI Akira <a.naribayashi@fujitsu.com> for finding
  and fixing a typo in an error string.
```

- Fortran/use-mpi-f08: Generate PMPI bindings from the MPI bindings.
- Converted man pages to markdown.
  Thanks to Fangcong Yin <fyin2@nd.edu> for their contribution
  to this effort.
- Fixed ompi_proc_world error string and some comments in pml/ob1.
  Thanks to Julien EMMANUEL <julien.emmanuel@inria.fr> for
  finding and fixing these issues.

> - oshmem/tools/oshmem_info: Fixed Fortran keyword issue when
>   compiling param.c. Thanks to Pak Lui <pak.lui@amd.com> for
>   finding and fixing the bug.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fixed Fortran keyword issue when
  compiling ``oshmem_info``. Thanks to Pak Lui for
  finding and fixing the bug.
```

> - autogen.pl: Patched libtool.m4 for OSX Big Sur. Thanks to
>   @fxcoudert for reporting the issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Updated ``autogen.pl`` to support macOS Big Sur. Thanks to
  @fxcoudert for reporting the issue.
```

- Updgraded to HWLOC v2.4.0.
- Removed config/opal_check_pmi.m4.
  Thanks to Zach Osman <zosman@gmu.edu> for the contribution.
- opal/atomics: Added load-linked, store-conditional atomics for
  AArch6.

> - Fixed envvar names to OMPI_MCA_orte_precondition_transports.
>   Thanks to Marisa Roman <marisa.roman@cornelisnetworks.com>
>   for the contribution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fixed environment variables names to ``OMPI_MCA_orte_precondition_transports``.
```

What does this sentence mean?

Marissa works for a core community member; we don't need to cite her.

Author: They must have been added since that PR, at that time they were not. Will remove.

> - fcoll/two_phase: Removed the component. All scenerios it was
>   used for has been replaced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> - btl/uct: Bumped highest supported UCX version to v1.10.x.
> - btl/uct: Updated the defaults to allow Mellanox HCAs
>   (mlx4_0, and mlx5_0) for osc/rdma to work out-of-the-box.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Bumped highest supported UCX version to v1.10.x for the ``uct`` BTL.  Also updated the defaults to allow Mellanox HCAs
  (mlx4_0, and mlx5_0) for MPI one-sided RDMA to work out-of-the-box.
```

Are these statements still true?

> - ULFM Fault Tolerance has been added. See ``README.FT.ULFM.md``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ULFM Fault Tolerance has been added.  See :ref:`the ULFM section <ulfm-label>`.
```

- Fixed a crash during CUDA initialization.

>   Thanks to Yaz Saito <yasushi.saito@gmail.com> for finding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Thanks to Yaz Saito for finding
```

  and fixing the bug.
- Added CUDA support to the OFI MTL.
- ompio: Added atomicity support.

> - Singleton comm spawn support has been fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Singleton ``MPI_Comm_spawn()`` support has been fixed.
```

> - Autoconf v2.7 support has been updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Add support for GNU Autoconf 2.7.x
```

- Fortran: Added check for ``ISO_FORTRAN_ENV:REAL16``. Thanks to
  Jeff Hammond <jeff_hammond@acm.org> for reporting this issue.

> - Changed the MCA component build style default to static.

Reviewer 2: This was already mentioned.

- PowerPC atomics: Force usage of opal/ppc assembly.

> - Removed C++ compiler requirement to build Open MPI.

Reviewer 2: Are you 100% sure that this is true?

Author: https://github.com/open-mpi/ompi/pull/9075

it's my understanding of that change.

> - Fixed .la files leaking into wrapper compilers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fixed .la files leaking into wrapper compilers.
```

Re-write this bullet into something that the user would be able to notice/understand.

Reviewer: Resolved in today's force push.

- Fixed bug where the cache line size was not set soon enough in
  ``MPI_Init()``.

> - coll/ucc and scoll/ucc components were added.

Reviewer 2: What exactly are these?  How would a user know what this line means?

- coll/ucc: Added support for allgather and reduce collective
  operations.
- autogen.pl: Fixed bug where it would not ignore all
  excluded components.
- Various datatype bugfixes and performance improvements
- Various pack/unpack bugfixes and performance improvements

> - Fix mmap infinite recurse in memory patcher

Reviewer 2: A line above said that patcher was removed...?

- Fix C to Fortran error code conversions.
- osc/ucx: Fix data corruption with non-contiguous accumulates
- Update coll/tuned selection rules

> - Fix non-blocking collective ops

Reviewer 2: Don't use abbreviated words.
```suggestion
- Fix non-blocking MPI collective operations.
```
